---
layout: post
title:  "A Critical Path"
date:   2016-10-17 20:41:25 -0400
---


I recently watched this [mini-documentary](http://motherboard.vice.com/blog/the-technological-disobedience-of-ernesto-oroza-cuba-s-diy-inventions) by VICE media outlet Motherboard, detailing the work of Cuban architect/designer Ernesto Oroza who meticulously collected and documented over the course of a decade, the various hardware hacks of Cuban citizens during the Cuban embargo.  Faced with a crisis of resource scaricity  during the height of the Cold War, Cubans were actively encouraged by the Castro government by way of a government issued manual and one which was citizen sourced, to repair failing equipment or to cannibalize their parts in order to repurpose them for other often vital uses.  Old motors became lathes for food production or woodworking; they were upcycled into the motors for diesel powered bikes and became fans that fought the futile battle against tropical heat.  Commonplace aluminum trays became the skeletons for tv antennas.  An array of random plastic parts became an array of children's toys. These crude looking objects form the basis of what Oroza calls "technological disobediance";  an act of dissecting and manipulating the intended function of a technology or object to further expand its utility and conform to the needs of the end user.  Born out of necessity, "technological disobediance" was a pathway for Cuban citizens to engage in an alternative maufacturing and design process that breathed new life into objects that would either be redundant or obsolete because of a malfunction.  These newly repurposed objects would only be limited the ingenuity or imagination of the individual deconstructing it's orginal function.  This short documentary reminded me of why I chose coding as an intellectual pursuit and how this notion of "technological disobediance" informs my fledgling path as a student of computer languages and a maker of code objects.  

There is something inherently very powerful about understanding the inner workings of the objects that surround us whether they be analogue or digital.  Being able to understand how the technology behind an object works not only opens the gateway to creative uses that might be more utiltiatarin or appropriate based on a need, but also changes the relationship between the object and its owner; utiltiy is no longer static and becomes an organic model that the object's owner defines, not what the societal or manufacturing consesus is over the object's pre-defined utility.  My background prior to learning code with Flatiron School is in the visual arts.  In a way, I feel I'm updating my tool set for a world increasingly shaped by digital objects rather than their analogue counterparts.  I began my artistic practice by molding objects out of clay and graphite and I'm extending this creative practice into building objects out of logic statements and programming syntax.  Much in the same way that my interest in the arts evolved from a need to understand and deconstruct the physical objects around me by way of an act of "technological disobediance", I am compelled to coding in a similarly curious and defiant way.  I'd rather be a maker than simply a consumer.  I think it's part of our nature as humans to be inclined towards not just using, but making and ultimately, instantiating.  

In a world framed by its digital infastructure, I'd like to navigate this ocean of new technologies in a ship of my own design.  I envison a world where it is a civic duty to be a developer, where the Internet or the Internet 2.0 is a construct of many citizen developers engaged in acts of "technological disobediance" and defining digital technologies that suit their individual needs.  With all this current discourse around AI replacing labour with capital, we might not have a choice.


